---
layout: default
---

# Token analysis - Layer 1s

### $LUNA (Terra)

#### Tokenomics
The tokenomics of $LUNA is tied with its use to stabilise stablecoins like $UST, $EUT and $KRT in the Terra ecosystem. These stablecoins are algorithmic and are not backed by any collateral. 1 $UST is minted by burning $1 worth of $LUNA at the Terra treasury. Conversely, $1 worth of $LUNA can be minted by burning 1 $UST at the treasury. $LUNA will be minted from burnt $LUNA. For details on how to mint $UST or $LUNA using Terra Station, refer to [Terra docs](https://docs.terra.money/docs/learn/terra-station/swap.html#market-swap).

*Before the Columbus-5 upgrade, $LUNA that was used to mint $UST (i.e. seigniorage) was mostly channeled into the Terra community pool to be used for funding new projects, with a portion of it being burnt. After Columbus-5, all the $LUNA used to mint $UST is burnt instead.*

$UST is able to maintain its peg with the help of arbitrageurs. When 1 $UST falls below $1 (e.g. $0.95), arbitrageurs can purchase 1 $UST at $0.95 and exchange it for $1 worth of $LUNA, which they can sell for $1. When 1 $UST rises above $1 (e.g. $1.05), arbitrageurs can purchase $1 worth of $LUNA and exchange it for 1 $UST, which they can sell for $1.05.

In addition to the use of $LUNA to stabilise Terra stablecoins, Terra ecosytem validators are required to stake $LUNA to secure the Terra proof of stake (PoS) blockchain. However, unlike other blockchains where validators are rewarded with both newly minted tokens (e.g. $SOL, $AVAX) and transaction fees, Terra validators are only rewarded with transaction fees. As Terra transaction fees are normally received in the form of Terra stablecoins ($UST, $KRT), validators receive these rewards instead. Most importantly, this means that no new $LUNA is being emitted to reward stakers, unlike other PoS blockchains.

The yield for staking $LUNA is calculated by dividing the total transaction fees over the total quantity of staked $LUNA. In turn, the total transaction fees depend on both transaction volume and transaction fee rate (typically 0.1-0.5%). Current staking yield for $LUNA is around 10%.

#### Distribution
The supply of $LUNA is only affected by the demand for Terra stablecoins. The maximum supply of $LUNA was set at one billion, but was distributed at genesis with the following allocations: Terraform Labs (10%), Employees & Contributor Pool (20%), Terra Alliance (20%), Stability Reserves (20%), Genesis liquidity (4%), Investors (26%).

#### People
[@stablekwon](https://twitter.com/stablekwon)

#### References
<https://twitter.com/CryptoHarry_/status/1467452640451706882>
<https://messari.io/asset/terra/profile/launch-and-initial-token-distribution>

---

### $BTC

### $ETH

### $AVAX

### $SOL

### $ATOM
